Okay, this is just a sound check. Bob, say
something. Hello, my name is Bob. How many people
check this door here? Probably like 100. I don't
know why they can't have it open. Okay, this is Ron
Shorn, and I'm interviewing Bob Havlin at the
American Astronomical Society Berkeley meeting
on June 6, 1993. So, Bob, for the record, what's
your full name? Robert James Havlin. How do you
spell that? H-A-V-L-E-N. Where were you born?
Utica, New York. And when? 1943. A date? Oh yeah,
September 16. How'd you get interested in
astronomy in the first place? I think it was a Boy
Scout project or a science fair project when I was
in the sixth or seventh grade. I had to draw some
maps of the night sky and find north. That started
my desire to look through telescopes and to buy a
telescope and eventually made my own telescope
and Gradually became more and more in contact with
the astronomical community. I was good at school.
Where did you go to undergrad school? Went to the
University of Rochester. And when did you
graduate from there? 1965. And what was your
major? Astrophysics. Did you start out in
astrophysics? I started out in astrophysics.
Why? Why did I start in astrophysics? Because with
my middle school and high school experience in
making my own telescope and reading about
astronomy, I decided that was an area that I wanted
to go into. As a matter of fact, I only applied as an
undergraduate to Cornell and to the University of
Rochester in New York State because those were the
only schools that had undergraduate degrees in
astronomy.
Where did you go to grad school and why? I went to the
University of Arizona because I realized that I
needed to be at a clear sight where I could get into
astronomy. It had a good national reputation. It
was growing. I applied to the University of
Michigan and to Harvard. I got accepted at
Michigan, didn't get accepted at Harvard, and
then Arizona and NASA traineeship and so on. It was
the best decision of my then young life. Because
the University of Arizona, of course, is right
across the street from Kitt Peak National
Observatory. So what did you do at Arizona? At
Arizona?
I got interested in x-ray astronomy and optical
astronomy and no radio astronomy really. And
gradually did a thesis under Bengt Westerlund
using photographic data and photoelectric data
on Cepheids and OB associations and the
relationship of them. And when did you get out? Why
did you pick that? Why did I pick that? Was it the
person or the field? Person, primarily, I think.
It was the ease with which I was able to work with Dr.
Westerlund and his vast experience in the field of
observational optical astronomy. Of course, I
was exposed to almost everything there was to be
exposed to back in the late 1960s because of our
interaction with Kitt Peak National
Observatory. And there were theoreticians
around. You know, I did fairly well at most of my
courses, but I found
after thinking about what I really wanted to do for
three or four months, I decided that I wanted to go
into studying Cepheids and OB associations with
Bank. He had lots of, he was an interesting guy. He
had lots of unreduced observational data to work
with and was inspirational in helping me decide,
you know, what further observations were to be
made and so on. I think that's Sort of a typical
interaction. It wasn't a question of money, as it
is these days, because I was supported by a NASA
traineeship. Was that your first contact with an
ASA? Yes, basically it was.
When did you finish your? I finished in late 1969.
When you were a grad student at Stuart, did any of
the infighting, well, or let's put it this way,
Kuiper and Bart Bock were perhaps not the world's
greatest friends? You know, I didn't really get
too much feel from that. I mean, Bock came in 1967
after I'd been there a couple of years. He was
always telling stories about Kuiper and Bach, and
I don't know, there was another guy, another
Dutchman that came over to the U.S. about the same
time as those two, and I can't remember. I think it
was a guy,
Peter Vandekamp, was it? No, but it's in Ray
White's obituary at Bach, so we can look at it.
Yeah, yeah, it's kind of neat, yeah. Did people at
Stuart or Kitt Peak look down on planetary work as
far as you know? Did the grad students say, oh, if I
can't get in with somebody that does stellar work,
I'll have to do planetary? Was any of that kind of
stuff still left when you were there? I don't think
so. Now that I think of it, yeah. Being a graduate
student at Stuart was an interesting experience
because you had a lunar and planetary lab right
across the street. And the people that did
planetary science, like Tom Garrels, like Pat
Romer,
I can't think of a few more names that were
associated with a lunar and planetary
observatory. They were there, yeah, exactly. And
I never got the feeling that this was a
secondary science. There was Bill Hartman, for
example. He was there. I mean, it was interesting
stuff. It just so happened that you know, you
really do have a difference of opinion as to
whether you want to go into planetary science. I
mean, planetary science is almost like geology.
It's close to home. And at least that was my
feeling. I didn't want to get into planetary
science, and I knew other graduate students that
really didn't want to get into planetary science.
They were more interested in stars and galaxies.
And that's just sort of a natural, because there
were graduate students, as a matter of fact, Ben
Zellner, who's now, I guess he does asteroid work
with , there was , there was a few other graduate
students. Planetary science was a real
challenge. It just wasn't something that I wanted
to get into. Where'd you go after you got your
degree? In January of 1970, we packed our bags, put
our car on a boat, got on an airplane, and went to
Chile.
I became a staff member at the European Southern
Observatory,
primarily because Westerland, my thesis advisor
six months earlier, had become the director
there, and he said, Bob, why don't you come down for
a year? So I said, fine, a year, I'll go anywhere.
Ended up being settled. What did you work on there
in general? In general, I was a staff astronomer,
of course, and I had to assist him. all the
equipment for all the visiting astronomers in
terms of Kude spectrographs, Castorine
spectrographs, single channel photometers and
so on. And I continued my interest in OB
associations and started surveying some of the
southern Milky Way in terms of accumulating data
that would allow us to then determine whether or
not the young blue stars we were detecting were
actually members of associations or whether they
were just in the field. And when did you leave there
and why? I left there in May of 1977, and we'd been in
Chile seven years, and our daughters were then one
and four years, so we decided to come back to the
States, and we didn't want our kids growing up
Chilean, basically. And the position I got in the
U.S. was as a lecturer at the University of
Virginia in Charlottesville. And I found it very
difficult to look for a position from outside the
US to get back into the US. And so I was very grateful
to be able to get some kind of temporary position
from which I could use as a base to look for a more
permanent position. And that fell into place,
unfortunately, upon the death of Nelson
Lindbergh. This is D. Nelson Lindbergh. D. Nelson
Lindbergh, exactly. And so what was this
permanent place? Well, the position I got was
University of Virginia as lecturer. And I was
actually on the staff there for two years. And at
the end of the second year, which would be 1979, in
the middle 19s after academic year, 78, 79, I then
took up a position at the National Radio Astronomy
Observatory, more of an administrative position
as assistant to the director with Mark Roberts. At
that point, it was better not to have to move the
family than to go to Washington, D.C. or someplace
like that. Why did they pick you? I was a warm body.
No, Mort Roberts and I got along very well. I had
worked earlier as a summer student at NRAO in 1964
in Green Bank with Mort. And I was interested in
a... in an administrative position because I had
been interviewed. Actually, I had been offered a
job at the National Science Foundation by Bill
Howard. And so I was trying to decide, did I want to
leave Charlottesville and move to Washington or
what? And Mort had just taken up position as
director at NRAO about six months earlier, and he
realized that he needed help. So for me, it was a new
challenge I was happy to move into. How long did you
stay there? Oh, I was with the NRAO, actually,
until just the beginning of this year. I was in
Charlottesville until mid-1988. So that's 11
years in Charlottesville and an additional four
years in Socorro. At the VLA. At the VLA, right.
When you first went into the National Radio
Astronomy Observatory, did you notice any
difference between optical and radio
astronomers? As a matter of fact, I did. I've
always noticed the difference between optical
and radio astronomers. You want to know what that
difference is? Yes, you mean going back to grad
school days? Yeah, basically. I mean, in grad
school, I have to admit that I never really came
across that many radio astronomers. Oh, there was
Frank Lowe, and there was the odd, I mean... Rare.
The rare radio astronomer that would come
through. We did have one radio astronomer on the
staff one official quote-unquote radio
astronomer on the staff at the University of
Arizona, and that was Andrei Paholchek. And he
taught the course in radio astronomy, and I found
radio astronomy to be much, much greater, much
more intensity in real physics. That is, radio
astronomers seem much more solidly based and
solidly ground, if you will, in... in techniques
and a theory of physics. The frustration, of
course, with the radio astronomers, I found, of
course, was that they didn't have any good angular
resolution. They had instrumentation that they
had to be extremely careful with. It seemed to me
that radio astronomers knew a lot more about the
inner workings of the computer than optical. I
can't take that back. Optical astronomers
generally knew a lot about their spectrographs.
their polarimeters and photometers, because
they had to make it work. Radio astronomers,
however, had found the nice technique of relying
upon a really high-quality staff of radio
engineers and computer scientists. And so the
actual astronomers really didn't know that much
about the black boxes they were using, but the
people that did made everything work exceedingly
well. And at the NRIO, I noticed that most of the
radio astronomers that I dealt with hardly ever
would, they sort of looked down upon optical
astronomy. They didn't care really what a
spectral type was or what constellation or
anything like that. They were really retooled
physicists or retooled ham radio operators more
than anything. Whereas optical astronomers
tended to be types that got excited about
astronomy from hands-on observing experiences
when they were either in high school or college.
And there was a rare optical astronomer who got
into optical astronomy because they were good in
physics and they were good in theory and then got
pushed into optical astronomy. But in general, I
thought the problems that radio astronomers were
asking and were able to answer were a lot more
in-depth in physics and global problems than
optical astronomers were asking. Maybe that was
naive, but that's my impression. Okay, so this
year, early this year, I guess, you left Socorro,
and where did you go? I left the, actually I left the
NRAO, and I left Socorro both at the same time, and
I'm now Executive Director of the Astronomical
Society of the Pacific. And for me it's an ideal
position because You know, I've sort of been a
hybrid between optical and radio astronomy. I've
never really put my solid foot down and said, this
is my area, and I am pigeonholed forever. I just
really get excited about all problems in
astronomy, and I've always been involved with
public outreach and public information since
coming back to the NRAO. When I was in Chile, of
course, I was working hand in in glove with all the
visiting astronomers. So I got to see a broad
perspective of the type of problems that
everybody that came to the observatory was
working on. And then when I came back to the U.S., I
was involved with radio astronomy. So then I got a
perspective of what it is to, what it means to be a
millimeter wave astronomer or a centimeter wave
astronomer or even a long wave astronomer and what
the problems of resolution are and and different
wavelength approaches to different problems.
And so I found myself, you know, with quite a large
global perspective that I guess I'm really now
able to take advantage of in my dealings with the
astronomical community. Why did you make this
last jump? Was it because the opportunity was
there? Basically, it was the opportunity was
there. You know, Andy Fracknoy had been the
executive director of the Astronomical Society
of the Pacific for the last 14 years or so. And... I
saw the advertisement in one of the, I think it was
the AAS's job newsletter. I read the description,
you know, it must be this, it must be that, and
experience of this, experience of that. I said,
you know, this is a job I can do. I can do all that
stuff. I almost replied to that myself, and that
would have been some competition, except that
this NASA contract was already looking good. I
see, I see. We already had word that we got it. And
also, I have to add that it was more or less an
opportunity for me to be my own boss, as it were.
It's kind of hard to work year after year after
year, sometimes having ideas that your boss
doesn't necessarily share, enthusiasm,
support, and so on. And now, in this position, I can
sort of make it or break it. I can pave new ground if I
really get enough energy up to do it. So you've done
optical, you've done radio, and now you have... I
have to do everything. I have to do everything.
Which is one of the reasons I want to interview,
because I'm going to start asking you some
questions now today.
How important do you think NASA money was to
helping astronomy in general, and planetary
astronomy in particular,
take off? Well, I don't know where to begin to
answer that question, of course. For NASA, to
answer about the importance of NASA money to
astronomy in general, I'd say that the
educational opportunities that NASA money
afforded to people like me, even though I never
ended up in planetary astronomy, the research
that I did never really affected any of the NASA
missions. It was really invaluable at the time
because I was able to go through graduate study
with a school without worrying about teaching
assistants or outside jobs or what have you. Of
course, I've seen the NASA money and the support
that it provided to the, I guess it was the Mount
Lemmon 61-inch telescope and all the research
work that got done there.
You know, the telescope on Mauna Kea. There's a
NASA telescope there, infrared facility.
There's two. There's the 88-inch and the IRT.
That's right, that's right. And I think, in
hindsight, I would say NASA probably could have
put more money in ground support to some of their
missions than they did. I mean, it's always...
Ground support has always been looked upon by the
people in national centers as only funded by the
National Science Foundation. The question has
always been raised, for example, how much impact
will the space telescope or any of the other
NASA-funded orbiting telescopes have on
ground-based facilities? And should NSF worry
about having to fund more ground support and so on?
I mean, you get the idea that I
think we've always worried about is
the demand for ground support going to overwhelm
the telescopes on the ground once we get all these
observations from space. And I think the answer
has been sort of halfway between the real terror
and the optimism. I mean,
my opinion has always been that, hey, there's only
24 hours in a day and there's a limited number of
astronomers. And if they're off getting X-ray
data, they don't have time to be getting radio data
from the ground or optical data from the ground.
There's no doubt that every single space
observatory that has returned data has changed
the character of the proposals that have been
submitted to the ground-based support . I mean,
for example, back in 1983, when IRS data started
coming down, the 12-meter telescope probably had
like 40, 50 percent of its proposals for the next
three or four years were always mentioning IRS
data this and IRS data this and we're following up
this from IRS and that from IRS. Basically, the
number of proposals did not overall to the
telescope didn't increase. The character of the
proposals changed because researchers were
getting data from infrared and now they wanted to
That's exactly parallel in planetary
ground-based observing every time a probe goes
by. Exactly. One question before I forget here,
because I skipped the lore on a little bit. 30 years
ago, if we'd be in an AAS meeting, there'd just be
one AAS meeting. Everybody would be in here. Now,
you don't see many planetary papers. You don't see
many solar papers. We've got all these divisions,
high energy, astrophysics, solar astronomy,
planetary astronomy, historical astronomy. And
some of them have their own specialized journals
now. In addition, in the old days, it was APJ, AJ,
and PASB. Publications of the Astronomical
Society of the Pacific. Do you think these
subdivisions of the AAS have been good or bad, or
just inevitable?
I think you put the nail on the head when you said
inevitable, because the general expansion of the
field makes it, I mean, even the American Physical
Society just cannot have a general meeting where
everybody exchanges information in a worthwhile
manner. on a broad diversity of topics. I mean, as
much as I, in the astronomical side of the Pacific,
feel that the public needs to be exposed to a broad
range of topics in a general sense, you know, solar
astronomy, planetary astronomy,
extra-gallactic astronomy, and all the
wavelength and so on, and it's good to meld them all
into one sort of uniform picture, at the detailed
professional level, where you're talking
researcher to researcher, The meetings,
especially the division meetings, extremely
important that they're talking on the same
topics. You would totally dilute the effort if you
were to mix extragalactic types with the division
meetings. The data transmission rate would be
very low. On the other hand, it's also very
important, a very important part of these
meetings is to have the overall survey talk,
you'll find a very high percentage of the members
of the AAS are younger graduate students or people
that are in academic positions where they're
teaching on all subjects. And for them to have a
broad perspective of what's going on in planetary
science or X-ray astronomy or high energy
astrophysics or you name it. In this meeting it
seems to be extreme ultraviolet astronomy. And in
other meetings it's been IRAS, and sometimes it's
the Ultraviolet Astro Program. It's essential to
have these overviews sort of cycle around all the
disciplines in astronomy so that your younger
folks or your people that are teaching general
courses and so on have a good perspective of the big
picture. chop it up so little that planetary
sciences only go to planetary science meetings.
It's not fair. Do you think planetary astronomy is
part of astronomy? Do I think it's part of
astronomy? That's a good question. I think it is
part of astronomy. But I'm asking myself, why do I
think it's part of astronomy? We use telescopes.
That's right. Planetary scientists use
telescopes. Some of them use space probes,
however, which are not really telescopes. It's
more like a remote geologist. You may have too much
knowledge to answer, so let me ask you this. You're
the big cheese at the PASP, and you ought to have
your finger on the pulse of this. Do you think the
public believes planetary astronomy is part of
astronomy? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. There's no doubt
about that. When people ask general questions
about astronomy or what draws them into the
interest of astronomy overall, one very
important part is planetary. After all, that's
what you can show them in a small telescope.
Granted, they're going to ask questions about the
Big Bang or search for extraterrestrial
intelligence. Let's not forget that the search
for extraterrestrial intelligence is related to
planetary systems. And the more we know about our
planetary systems, for example, at the ASP, the
questions I get from the press or radio and
television stations, they increase enormously
during the time when we have a lunar eclipse, a
solar eclipse, a close cometary approach, a
meteor shower. I mean, these are things that the
public can easily identify because they can
easily see them. So from the public's
perspective, planetary astronomy may be the only
part of astronomy they ever come in contact with.
You think, you know, we've had 30 years and now we
can see details on Jupiter that we never saw, rings
around other planets than Saturn, Mars, pictures
in the surface. Do you think that's had any effect
on the public? I mean, has it changed the way they
look at things or their interests in planetary
astronomy, astronomy and science in general? Or
is it a passing fact? You know, I think we have to be
careful to answer a question like that because I
think that the space program in general and also
the
detailed information that comes from the space
probes about other planets in the solar system has
made the public almost take things for granted. I
remember when I was in high school or when you were
in school, You know, one space probe, one space
launch was a fantastic event. Nowadays, we have
shuttles get set up every month or two, and no big
deal. We don't go through the countdown. We don't
hear anything in the news. You know, we know
they're up there. We take it for granted that
they're doing good stuff. And another space probe
goes by. I mean, Voyager was a big deal, no doubt
about it. But, you know, does the public get
excited about another telescope getting
launched? Astronomers make lots of noise about
it. And the amount of information that comes from
that new telescope can be overwhelming. There's
just so much data coming down. But the public is
sort of getting
blase about the whole thing and taking things for
granted. Here's a question you don't have to be a
planetary astronomer to answer. But you have to
know something about astronomy and the funding
end and all that. and the public interest in. In 30
years now, we've looked all over the solar system,
haven't yet found a trace of present or previous
life anywhere except Earth. In particular, no
green men on Mars, not even a bug. Sure. Do you think
that's had a negative effect on public interest
funding or not? No, I don't think so. I really don't
think so. Why don't I think so? That's a good
question. I mean, I think the search is fun. And the
questions always come down from the press or from
people that don't know a lot of details about the
types of search and so on. Have you found it? Part of
the problem that the scientist has in
communicating science to the public
is related to their desire to know the biggest or
the smallest, the most distant or the closest, the
oldest or the youngest, or what's the latest
discovery. I mean, they think science is made up of
just eureka discoveries, and they don't really
understand the scientific curiosity process. So
I think there's an interest, you know, in the
public. If you say that you're looking for
extraterrestrial intelligence or you're
looking for life in the solar system, And that's
always a motivation to get the public interested.
They're always going to ask you, did you find it?
But
part of the challenge of being a scientist is to
give
the public more appreciation for the fact that
it's the hunt that's most important. It's the
thrill of the hunt, and that continues no matter
what you find. You open more unanswered doors than
you do, you know, you always ask more questions
after you've made an experiment than you answer.
It's just amazing. Here's a two-part question.
One, do you think astronomers in general have done
a good job, or as good a job as they could have been,
in selling themselves to the public and to the
Congress? And then I'm going to be specific and
say, I believe that the radio astronomers have
always done their infighting behind closed
doors, spilled the blood there, and come out
charging with a unified front, whereas the
optical astronomers do all their internecine
strife on the stage. So Perot, Kahn, what do you
think? Getting astronomers, or getting
scientists in general, but the scientists I know
best are astronomers, and getting astronomers to
be forthright and to participate in public
outreach programs is a mixed bag. There's about, I
would say, like 10% of the astronomers on the staff
of major research facilities that are really
willing to be science for judges or to give tours to
observatories and so on. I think it's a lot
different when you get to the academic community
because their people are constantly dealing with
students and the public and so the percentage
there probably is much higher. I think and on that
basis I would say astronomers really haven't done
a good job but I mean how many astronomers do you
need to have out there One Carl Sagan is worth
10,000 other astronomers. And so it's kind of hard
to answer that question. Now, related to the
question of optical versus radio, I think you have
to be very, very careful.
Because radio astronomers have always been
really totally dependent very soon after the
beginning of radio astronomy. Radio astronomy
actually began in the 1930s and really wasn't
going full force until the 1950s after the war. And
very soon thereafter was the creation of national
observatories. So radio astronomers have
always, not always, but for the most part, have
been using national facilities. You just know
they cannot spend the money at a local university
to build an instrument big enough, so it's been
national facilities. And it's a much smaller
population of scientists, let's say probably
between 10% and 20% of the number of optical
astronomers. And so the people to do the fighting
are fewer. The efficiency of getting telescope
time for the members of the community because of
the existence of large national centers like
Arecibo and NRAO and so on, and some major
university facilities like Owens Valley and so
on. It's much more successful for radio
astronomers to get telescope time. Optical
astronomers, on the other hand, they come from a
different community at the outset.
Historically, they grew up in large private
telescopes like Lick and Mount Palomar and so on.
And so they were in-house type astronomers. And
only over the course of the last three
decades, so to speak, since the NSF was founded,
have you gotten astronomers spread out far and
wide at small schools and large schools and
everywhere. And they don't have their own
telescopes. And so there's the in-group, the
people that have their own private, as it were,
major facility, University of Texas, Caltech,
Those big places, Arizona and so on, and those
people are sort of the upper cream, the best
scientists there always have lots of telescope
time. And you've got the other community out there
fighting for telescope time because they don't
have their own telescopes that are there. It seems
to be a much, for one thing it's a much larger
community, I'd like to say before probably a
factor of 10 higher. and there's not enough
national facility telescope time to go around for
this large mass of scientists that are groping for
time. So they tend probably, you know, when it
comes right down to it, it's easy to say, you know,
you iron your difficulties out in private, but
there's always somebody that walks away feeling
hurt whenever you have a discussion about whether
planetary science is better than, extragalactic
or ultraviolet is better than x-ray and so on.
Somebody... In that connection, planetary
astronomy is really half and half. It shares some
characteristics with both. But what I'm thinking
of, for example, a 10-year recommendation
reports come together. The radio astronomers
seem to pick one thing and stick with it. Planetary
astronomers pick one thing and stick with it. And
the stellar and galactic and extra-galactic
optical astronomers keep right on fighting even
after it comes out. It seems like it. It always
seems that way. It does seem that way. But I can tell
you that there's plenty of hurt people in the radio
community, too. Although they came together and
endorsed VLBA, back in the early 80s. And lo and
behold, the darn thing is constructed now because
it was a project that was ready to go when the
funding became available. There are also a lot of
hurt people in the radio community that were
hoping for a 25-millimeter wave dish. It never
happened. And the NRAO is ready to go with a
millimeter array. I don't know if it'll ever
happen. And gradually the astronomers at some of
the major universities have started to build
their own millimeter array. Millimeter
astronomers have basically felt like they've
been left off. And it's an extremely powerful
field. Lately, a lot of astronomers, and we're
talking optical, radio, planetary, stellar,
have been getting a lot of publicity and evidently
some money off of projects that get a lot of public
play, like search for extraterrestrial
intelligence, killer asteroids, search for
other solar systems, ozone holes in the Earth's
atmosphere. Do you think they're overdoing that
or not? I think the public is extremely interested
in these type of projects, and it's good that they
get press. I think astronomers have to be careful
to spread the press out to, and I think the AAS does a
real good job, and Steve Moran in the press office,
in getting the press interested in other ongoing
critical issues in astronomy. You have to
remember that some of those topics in modern
astronomy are pretty esoteric and hard to
describe to the public, so killer asteroids and
SETI and all those you know planetary stuff that's
when one respect planetary science has an
advantage it's easier to communicate the problem
to the public i don't think we can i don't think we
can really overdo communicating the public
however and what's good for planetary scientists
in the short run because their project is
described well to the press. It's good for
astronomers in general. Whether it's planetary,
radio, or optical, I think probably all in the same
bathtub. I mean, all in the same boat. And is the
boat sailing along nicely? Is it dead in the water?
Or is it sinking in general as far as, say, funding
goes and stuff like that?
Well, I don't know. I have to be careful. Not
necessarily just funding, because we know that's
dead in the water. But what do you think? Use your
crystal ball. I mean, I've always felt that
we tend to get too greedy. We tend to get a major
facility and then milk it to death for data. And
we're never satisfied. There's another facility
we just have to have, another facility we just have
to have. And admittedly, it is a complex area
because you always need more resolution. You
always need a different wavelength coverage. And
the problems nowadays are not simply focused in
what you can get out of the ultraviolet data or what
you can get out of the infrared data. You have to put
the whole thing together in one big
multi-wavelength picture. And astronomers know
you need 20 telescopes and not just one. And
Congress wonders, well, jeez, I just gave you one.
Why do you need another one? But is the situation
healthy? I think that in terms of our ability to do
research, let's say the ability to gather the data
that we need, the situation is extremely healthy.
The question on an individual basis, for an
individual, can an individual exist at a
university or make a career, you know, there's a
threat there. There's a threat there because the
funding, the instruments are there, the data is
there for the best people. The question is what
about the middle pack? Is there enough funding to
attract the brightest students into the field, to
keep them into the field, and so on. And I think the
situation there is of great concern. The number of
PhDs that are generated is like a factor of three or
four at least, more than the number of real jobs.
And that's a concern. That's not healthy in the
long term. On the other hand, should there be a
continuous growth in the number of PhDs that are
created in a field like astronomy, I think we have
to reach a steady state. Otherwise, there won't be
any archaeologists left, and there won't be any
new farmers, and so on. I think one indicator of
public interest and the public taxpayer's
willingness to support, give money to astronomy,
Are the fortunes of the Astronomical Society of
the Pacific, how are those doing now? Well, the
Astronomical Society of the Pacific has always
had great success in its programs, primarily
because it addresses issues in education.
There's a vast pool of teachers out there that need
help. and information on astronomy and the way to
teach it to kids and so on. Teachers that have not
had any formal training themselves and sometimes
not even formal training in science. The ASP has
extremely successful summer meetings that have
just grown by leaps and bounds in communicating
science in a very popular way and also addressing
some professional scientific topics as well as
teacher workshops and so on. The problem that the
ASB has is one that most nonprofit societies face
at one time or another, and that's the bottom line
in terms of getting the funds it requires just to
keep operating. I mean, it's a small society. Its
historical base is regional.
It's so broad that
it has been hard in the recent past to actually
attract funds, I guess, basically, in terms of
there's no real strong corporate support. Those
are some of the goals that I have in getting strong
corporate support and getting the programs
underwritten
by funding agencies, people that are interested
in education, and getting more professional
involvement in the society.
Some people join the society, and after a year or
two, they realize that they come to the conclusion
that they're not getting enough out of society to
continue being members. And my answer to them is,
hey, listen, the society is made up of you. You
maybe don't have enough time to go out and talk to
your local school classes or to give a public
lecture and so on. But as a scientist, as an
astronomer, you should give some strong support
and backing to those people in the scientific
community who are willing to do the outreach
programs that you basically should be morally
obligated to support because you're getting
support from the public. And so you've got to give
something back. Some people just don't like to do
that. So why not join the society and let the
society do it for them and speak strongly with one
voice? So the society is in a great state of change
right now in terms of expansion, in terms of
seeking funding support, and in terms of the type
of programs we want to get into, I have no doubt that
we'll succeed in all this. This doesn't have
anything to do with the history of planetary
astronomy, but I've got to ask you. The very name,
Astronaut of the Pacific, implies regional. We
don't want to be just regional anymore. I'm
thinking of changing the name. That question was
put to me originally when I got interested in
society. I looked at it and I said, yeah, you're
right. The name is a detriment when somebody back
in Georgia goes to their dean and says they're
going to publish a paper in the PASP. He says, why
the PASP? Why not the PASA? If there's such a
journal. Or if you go to the University of Florida
and say you want to have a meeting of the ASP in
Florida, they're going to say, who's the ASP? But
You have to remember the society is a real
venerable society. It's been around for over 100
years. There's a very strong following here on the
West Coast and in several of the states in the U.S.
And we even have members from 70 foreign
countries. There are plenty of other
organizations that exist with strange names. It
just makes it a little bit more of a challenge, a
little more of a challenge challenge to do our I
don't really feel that it's a time to upset the
apple cart by making a name change. A new director
and a new name change? No, no, no. We'll exist with
our own name, with our old name.